Thanks.
All right. We're live. Excellent.
Well, welcome Health New Zealand.
Very good to have you present to us
on the New Zealand Health Plan.
Uh, and to everyone, welcome to the Health Committee.
I'm Sam Dale Committee.
Uh, you'll be familiar with all of the members
around the table here.
Um, I'll let you give a, a quick intro to it,
maybe a few minutes if you, if you will, um, five Max,
and then we'll, we'll move into two members,
ask some questions, and I know members will
have a number of questions.
Sure. Thank you. Well, thank you very much.
We, you are okay too. And thank you very
much for having us along here today.
Uh, we thought we might start with, uh, just a brief summary
of the New Zealand Health Plan
and also talk about some of the limitations that we had
as Health New Zealand at the time
that the plan was produced.
Uh, I won't take you through the whole documents,
but we leave that for you there.
But I thought we might just start by talking on that, uh,
very second slide,
which is Health New Zealand's Planning Landscape.
Uh, so you can see
that the New Zealand Health Plan sits within, uh,
number of other accountability
and planning documents that we do as a health entity.
So those include the statement of performance expectations,
statements of intent, as well as workforce plans,
so health delivery plan.
And then we have medium term, uh, statements as well.
And this document is part of those medium term, um,
uh, documents that we produce for accountability.
I'd make the note too, that the New Zealand Health plan
should be, uh, read alongside the health status report,
the health target implementation plans, uh, as well.
And so they're, they're very strongly connected
into the New Zealand Health Plan.
So as they are the companion pieces,
and they're not repeated within the health plan
because those other documents also exist.
So that planning landscape is complex,
but it's also, uh, quite significant.
And so this piece should be seen within the wider context of
that all our accountability documents
and also the things that we report and publish against.
So that's a little bit about the health plan.
You'll know it's a three year plan.
It's required under prior order,
and it gives effect to the GPS,
the government policy statement.
The other side I just wanted to, um, mention is, uh,
the timing because we,
the New Zealand Health Plan takes effect from
July 1st, 2024,
and of course it hasn't been published, uh, until, uh,
July, 2025.
So I think it's useful just, uh, in terms of context,
the Journey Health New Zealand has been on
because work on this health plan, which is the replacement
for Tata started back in September in 2023.
Uh, of course we had a change of government, uh,
and then we got the GPS, uh, delivered to us in June.
Uh, of course, the health plans to take effect from July.
Uh, so we've got a issue there of timing.
And then in June, July,
we also had significant change within Health New Zealand,
including the appointment of a commissioner
and the need to take into account
the commissioner's priorities.
After that, uh, the plan was finalized in December, uh,
audit New Zealand, uh, then had it,
and then you'll see the minister also needs
to approve the plan,
and then it got published in, um, August.
So that's a little bit of that history
and a bit of an explanation around the timing.
Uh, and then the final thing I'll say is that we, um, accept
that the plan is completely a plan that was done at a period
of time when it was, uh, going
through quite significant change for Health New Zealand.
Our systems are maturing as we go.
One of the issues is the degree to which the plan's able
to be costed.
Uh, and we have said in our, uh, opinion here
that in our view, our systems were not mature enough
to cost it as to potentially the expectation of the office
of the Audited general.
Uh, our view about that is those systems are absolutely
maturing, and we've got a chief financial officer here
that can speak to some of, um,
those issues if there's questions related to that.
So I'll stop there and,
and leave you with the presentation. Thank
You, Dr. Graham. Thank
you for that overview.
I'll come to Aisha first also has a question.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. And thanks, Dr. B Brimley.
I'd like to that this, um, the issues
around the health plan
and the desire
to have performance reporting in the health system have a
long history with this committee.
And, um, the auditor general regularly briefs us
as members on the committee on how to do our job in terms
of scrutiny and understanding
how we're getting value for public funds.
And this goes, uh, that input was also
provided by the Auditor General
to the Select committee when the PY R Act was written.
And the change to have an audited plan
or costed plan was, um, part of a response
to the auditor general's feedback at at that point.
So my question is,
what will good look like over time as your systems continue
to mature in terms of the specificity of
linking, um, public investment to,
to outcome?
Um, will we see, uh,
we put this much extra
and then we're able to deliver x, Y, Z additional service?
And to what level of granularity not expecting the world?
What I'm trying to ask is
what should our expectations be in the, in the future?
Hmm. Thank you. So, um, I'll get Bevin to respond shortly,
but I would say between this plan
and where we're at now,
we have seen a significant improvement, both in terms of
how we set our budgets
and the costings related to those budgets.
So we are able to do a top down budgeting process as well
as a bottom up budgeting process.
And that's by district.
Uh, we are also able to, um, move now
to understanding our production planning.
So from a national level that's dropped to regional,
and we hope to go to a district level, uh, as part
of this next round where we really clearly see district
by DI district what they can produce.
One of the things that has changed over time, um, is
that we had quite sophisticated costing systems
that were in place some time ago.
Um, uh, back in the DHB period,
some DHBs costed, well, others didn't.
So we never had a, a good national view of that,
but we definitely were more advanced,
and we are, we've lost some of that.
So part of that is to rebuild costing.
So where am I going to that?
I think you'll see a much closer linkage between
what is the funding available
and what's going to be produced district by district,
class by class.
And we will look to strengthen the costing system.
So we'd much better understand the cost of each
purchase unit being produced.
But, um, I'll hand over, oh, maybe one other thing,
performance reporting.
Um, we want to be able
to release more information more regularly.
So we have the quarterly report, which has 33 metrics in it.
Many of them relate to our accountability documents.
Uh, we are keen to be able to move to release,
um, more regularly.
Again, things like health target reporting on a much more
regular, um, frequency, accepting that
that will be operational data, not
as it were fully quality assured.
And I think as long as people understand the difference,
then we would be keen to do that.
So we are just setting up our systems to be able to look at
that and how we can get it out more regularly.
So we want to get to much more regular
release of information. I'll hand over to Ben.
I think it's very well said, Dale.
Three things that are critical from my perspective,
that you have a budget that is built bottom up,
but meets your top down envelopes to work within,
and that that is owned
by the local districts and and regions.
The second thing is that you are then able
to have integrated performance reporting against that.
And by integrated, you need
to have the operational performance
and the financial hand in hand.
And under, uh, Dale's guidance,
we now have monthly performance reports
with reporting reviews with our regions, which do that,
which bring those two things together.
So you should expect that you see that.
And which flows into the public reporting
that Dale refers to.
The third thing that we would high I would highlight is
that better productivity reporting?
Is that something that you should expect?
So how are we getting better value out
of every dollar that we spend?
We are maturing in that space at the moment.
We now have that integrated into our monthly reviews,
but it is at too much of an aggregated level.
So we need to take that from a regional and district view
and bring it down to theater, local levels.
Yeah. Thanks. They're really compelling answers.
Um, one of the, uh, challenges is
that the health system does so many different things,
and I could imagine you'd be able to come back next year
and the, if you rewrote the plan, you'd have, um,
we're spending this much on hip operations
and we've, um, been able to deliver so many, you,
you could technically do that task.
Um, and there are some high you, uh,
but you could not do that for every,
everything in the health system.
Right? So one of the things I, I assume you can't,
so there's nothing in the document about dialysis services
for existence, for instance,
but I also couldn't imagine a sensible document would get
down to that level of granularity.
So could you please describe how you'll ma manage
that challenge in the future?
Will you be picking some representative outputs
and how would you, how would you decide what they are?
Yeah, so we are moving that way internally now.
So, so for example,
there's obviously a very significant focus on the health
targets, but we also try to understand balancing measures
around each of those targets.
And then we are now looking at a suite of diagnostic, um,
waiting times and understanding
how diagnostic waiting times are moving
and getting much more regular reporting on that.
In terms of things like elective surgery
or FSAs, uh, we would look at major class
for reporting against, so both volume
and if we can improve our costing systems to a point,
at least have a selection of those, which we, we can get
to a costed view of some
of those high level procedures like hips, knees, cataracts.
So we would pick up tension.
The thing is to look at the very high volume ones. Mm-hmm.
Or there's, uh, the, the ones which are potentially, um,
high risk, uh, if they're left, um,
such as cardiac surgery, where we want
to keep a very close eye on those groups as well.
And just, um, uh, last up on this Mr.
Chair, uh, the, um,
document mentions how these enable, um, decisions
around trade-offs, which is the reality of how we have
to allocate resources in the health system.
How are you able to think about that over, say,
a 10 year horizon?
Some of the big changes
that are necessary will take a long, a long time.
So, um, what do you need to be able to, uh,
to be able to do that to, how, how might you plan,
for example, to bring, um, more resource into primary care
and out of the hospital, over out
of hospitals over time and achieve that?
So, that's a very good question.
I, I, I'd answer it in several ways.
I, I've been doing planning
and funding things in the health sector for 25 years,
and within one to two years, usually our, um,
planning environment changes quite significantly.
It's, it's a, so having a, a stable
long-term view of what we are trying to achieve
and the funding that would go with that,
I think is very important.
Um, because if we don't have those two things,
we are in a much more dynamic situation where as soon
as you can produce something, it can be out
of date within the year.
And that's the potential issue with a long-term plan is
that dynamic environment changes.
And so a lot of your assumptions that you made in
that plan will change.
So I think stability around that is the first thing.
Uh, being, having signals about longer term fundings
important for us so that we can future forward focus our,
our production plans,
and so we can understand what we can produce over time.
But the, um, third thing I would say
that in the health system, it is much more difficult to
disinvest, um, much easier to invest and add to things.
And when we are in a, uh, potential for disinvestment
or for a change in services, then, um, you need,
uh, a basically a significant coalition of the willing
around, um, that if we need to disinvest to reinvest.
And so those environments are very difficult, I would say.
Um, and it's understandable too,
because if you have public services,
people are very attached to those services
and those delivery, and they don't want change.
And, and we get that. So part of that's for us
to produce a compelling reason of why something
new might be a lot better.
So we need to be able to do that and articulate that.
The final thing I'd say, um,
at the moment we are probably on the cusp
of some quite significant
and, uh, changes in healthcare moving forward.
We are seeing the advent of AI enhanced technologies.
We have just started, uh, the release of something called,
um, uh, some AI ambient scribes in our hospitals.
I've never seen something taken up so fast
inside the health sector mm-hmm.
Uh, where the clinical demand is so extraordinary high.
So we're up to 700, um, clinicians using it,
another 500 waiting.
Um, those technologies, uh, you know, we have to go
through a very careful assessment of them,
but they will significantly change, I think some
of our productivity and some of the advances in cancer,
cancer medicines, uh, the way that we, um,
think about where does care need to be delivered, um,
we'll come to our view about can we deliver much more care
and straight into people's home with supports straight
to the home, which now
that's a really significant model shift, right?
'cause 'cause we're so used to our view about
what hospitals do, what primary care does.
So we have to build into these plan basically
a very clearer articulation of what's coming
and how over time we can shift.
And it's a multi-year shift,
and I think we need to carve out places in the
plan for that going forward. Thank
You. I've got
Ricardo and then Hamish. Thank you.
I've just got a question in a couple of subs
to follow it up, but noting your remarks
around the interconnectedness
of the New Zealand health plan, as well
as some other shortterm shorter term documents
like the health workforce plan.
Can I ask whether, um, from your perspective, um,
whether you think that safe staffing levels play a role in
achieving the goals
that you laid out in the, you see on health plan?
And if so, how are you hoping
to achieve safe staffing levels in order to meet the goals
that you've, um, put in place in the health plan as well?
So the workforce is a key enabler of the entire plan.
Um, we can't deliver any of the plan without our workforce,
and they, they are our single most valuable
resource in Health New Zealand.
So I think that would be my opening view.
Um, we have some of the best
and most highly trained workforces in the world.
Um, we are very privileged to have them working with us.
The second point I would make about the, uh, the plans is
that we then produce health workforce plans,
which should be seen as companions to this,
both mental health and gen, general health workforce plans,
which show us where our priorities are, uh,
around those workforces
and where we are trying to get to, uh, in terms
of both development of our workforce
and also where the investment priorities are.
And then I would say in terms of safe staffing, uh, a lot
of work is going on
and we've got Richard, our chief,
probably go into a bit more detail for you.
Um, trying to understand the right mix of staffing
for the acuity of the patients that we see in hospitals.
Safe staffing has got a particular connotation
to it at the moment, but when I look at it from the,
the lens, I see that quality care is made up
of multiple dimensions, access, effectiveness, efficiency,
equity, as well as safe.
And so it's not just one person, it's how the team works
to care for a patient and their family.
Uh, undoubtedly that really relates
to our health workforce plan.
Yeah. And add to that, um,
I think this question of safe care really.
So, um, we work very closely with HQ C around a series
of metrics that assess the safety of care in our hospital,
pressure injuries, um, you know, uh,
infection rates, et cetera, et cetera.
And so we look at those metrics regularly to really assess
how safe our hospitals, we are part of, uh,
health round table, uh, which is a data set,
which gives us a view now across the whole country.
So it gives us a real ability to go, okay, where are areas
where, you know, issues or risks are arising,
and how do we kind of get involved in that space to look at
what the staffing model's like,
but also the real opportunity, uh, to kind of shift
to a more interprofessional, um, model of care.
So looking at different workforce models,
particularly Allied Health, the around the one just front
and center right now would be
around the muscular fetal pathway.
So patients who have, you know, um, back injuries
or have poor shoulder injuries, getting them
to see advanced physios, uh, bringing 'em into the system,
uh, and then making sure we've got our surgeons working on
the patients where the care is the greatest benefit.
So it is to, to, um, today point quite a complex space,
but there's some real, um, important metrics that we look at
around safety care, staffing.
Um, and I just reiterate Dale's point.
Um, our workforce is our number one, you know, pardon.
And this opportunity as we've moved away from 20 districts
to regions to kind of collectively try
and solve these problems
so we can deliver better care for everybody.
Will you be using the care
and capacity demand management data as part of, um,
measuring your performance in that area?
So we do use that particularly in our wards.
So, um, that's a, a tool that's been,
as you be aware around for a long time.
And so we use that along our wards.
We are, um, working with our colleagues, unions, et cetera,
around reviewing.
Um, it's because it,
it's works well in some spaces, but not in all spaces.
So our EDS is a challenging space to, to make that,
that tool actually work out
what we need from a safety perspective.
Um, but yeah, certainly it's still part of our, our package
of, of measures to deliver our care
And looking at that data set more importantly,
what do you think it tells you in terms of, um, the,
the work ahead when it comes to safe staffing levels?
I mean, looking at some of those data sets,
it looks pretty dire.
Do you acknowledge that, um,
the dataset paints a grim picture
and that, you know, better, better, um, transparency
and release of that information can give the public
and the workforce confidence that, um,
those issues are being addressed?
Uh, I guess I'll bring it back to my earlier comments
that, um, sort of we look at safe care.
So, and staffing is a component of safe care,
but there are many components of safe care.
So I think that yes, um,
those metrics are helpful in helping to try
and create that entire picture,
but it's not the only, uh, component of it.
So I would, I would, um, I guess challenge the comment that,
uh, that's the answer to, to, to safe care.
I think it's a component of safe
Care, but it is an Important mate, uh, hold on.
We'll come through the chair, please.
Through the chair. It is an important data point, though,
in order to measure performance.
It, I accept that it's not the only one,
but that you acknowledge it's not the less,
quite an important data point's.
One of the data points that we have to assess safety,
Please. Thank you, Dr. Kim.
Excellent. Brilliant. Thank you.
Um, and I appreciate Health New Zealand is probably one
of the more complex, uh,
organizations we have here in, in New Zealand.
Um, and I, so I appreciate the work that's gone in.
We have heard previously, um, in this committee that
the combined district health wards have a lower output than
individual, uh, district health wards.
How is this plan going to, um,
help our efficiency in the healthcare system?
Put another set? Yeah, go for it.
Oh, well, I'll start. And then Bevin.
So the health targets, for example,
in the plan are very tear clear articulation over time of
where we are aiming in terms of milestones
and then what the target is.
And then we also have volume information that we expect
to deliver, uh, by our services and here.
So I think there are those plans,
and then you need to read them in, uh, association
with the health target implementation plans,
which we have both for the health targets
and for the mental health targets, right?
So, uh, if you read them as a combined,
you'll see the actions that need to be undertaken, uh,
under each health target
and what we think that will achieve.
So with that in mind, I think, um, if we start
to look at how we are doing in terms of this last year,
and we've just released our Q4 report, uh,
so on those health targets, uh, we are now starting
to see some movement.
So, um, for example, minimization has gone from 76 to 82%.
We're still a long way short,
but we've seen that trajectory turn the first time in
several years since 20 20, 21.
We've seen the FSA and elective target got achieved in Q4.
Uh, so that was, uh, very pleasing.
We've seen cancer target also achieved
and we're 0.1% off the ED target.
We are also looking how we've performed for each
of those over a series of years.
And you can see now an upward trajectory, um, that some
of those improvements started around January, February,
because we have some very long waiting lists
and we've been trying to bring them down.
So what you will see is, um, movements in those indicators
and those targets in particular,
because we are very focused on them, as I said,
we wanna be mindful of balancing measures
and think about them and be able to release,
uh, that information.
So it's not the, uh, only thing we,
and we are trying to hold them into context within
terms of health outcomes.
And you'll also see, uh,
and when we release our quarterly reports is those 33
measures, you'll be able to see how they're tracking
and what's, uh, um,
and the narrative, what is, uh, uh, being associated to,
to get to those improvements.
Okay. Give us, Uh, I would just add quickly, um,
productivity across the health system has
been in decline for 10 years.
In the past 12 months is the first time we've seen
that stabilize and start to, uh, improve.
Um, so that's done under the collective system.
I think if I could use the example of infrastructure
as well, we're now starting to see examples
where we have like projects across multiple parts of, uh,
the coun country Minister Brown announced, uh,
just last week, the temporary inpatient, uh, units
that we're putting into five of the districts.
We'll use a single, uh, constructor to do that.
We'll use standardized design.
So there are opportunities like that as well,
which didn't exist previously under, under the districts.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and just kind of really following up on the
infrastructure piece, uh,
what about the IT infrastructure
is, uh, we're going forward?
Um, appreciate the, it's an 85 page document to cover one
of the most complex, uh, organizations in the country.
So not everything can be,
can be spelled out whereabouts is kind of the plan
around the it it systems to have the integrated,
um, approach across the country.
We, um, we've as you know, published the, um,
on the physical infrastructure,
our 10 year health infrastructure plan earlier this, um,
this year, which is an important
part of our long-term planning.
And we're very close to publishing our 10 year digital, uh,
investment, uh, priorities over that.
Uh, over that period, um, Dale has, has referenced the power
of those digital investments
to really enable frontline improvements in
care and productivity.
As, as we've worked on that plan, we see a lot
of those opportunities
and they need importantly, to be done as part
of a consistent framework.
So we're pleased that we'll be able to publish
that plan shortly, which will show the roadmap
of investments we think are important, uh, to Dale's point
as we embrace what is really a cusp of change in
how care is is delivered.
So that will be out shortly.
Dr. Ll Um,
you were very polite earlier when I asked about planning,
and you pointed out the planning environment is difficult
because of changes in the environment.
You didn't say that it was politicians that caused them, um,
which is not kind of you,
but, um, that's probably the truth.
And I wondered if, um, you had thought about
how getting agreed priorities
across political cycles could be enabled by transparency.
So, um, has just done a, doing a report into
dementia beds, for example,
and we've learned that there's no, um,
long-term projections owned by the health system, uh, of,
um, the number of dementia beds we need.
Clearly, we can't do our job of thinking about
how we get tore, create the policies that support getting to
that place without, um, information about
what these long-term needs and challenges are.
So you see planning
or other types of reporting as being able to support clear
articulation of what New Zealand's
needs are in the long term.
So in terms of, um, healthcare planning, the, you know,
the traditional, um, way that we would think about
that is in terms of, um, health needs of your population,
how that's changing over time, our capacity
to respond in terms of our providers, public, private
community, NGOs, uh,
and then an overlay of, you know, where is healthcare going?
And try and bring that all together
and say, uh, for a planning,
here's our priority areas based on epidemiology,
based on health needs, based on patient
and provider feedback.
And then, um, uh, would,
what would a investment program look like to
improve health outcomes related to those classes?
Right. Um, I think if there was, um, consistency
of alignment about population needs
and responses to them, I think
that would be a very good thing.
The other thing I would say is often there's difference in,
um, style but not substance.
Because actually, for example,
when we do the healthcare needs, we know
that the most significant, uh, cause of death
for New Zealanders is still
cardiovascular disease and cancer.
Uh, we know that the risk factors
are still the risk factors.
Uh, the thing that's probably a lot more dynamic now is
these technologies, uh,
and the relative emphasis that goes on to different things.
I think if you had a longer term plan
where there was alignment around that,
it would be, uh, very good.
Well, that's, that's, um, reassuring.
So one of the things that, um, we go to some of the areas
of more specific planning, the, um, infrastructure plan.
Uh, it does not contain bed numbers.
Now I'm all on board if we're gonna have modern ways
of housing patients that are not beds,
but I'm pretty sure beds are still gonna be important
for the next decade.
How can we really be saying we're meaningfully doing
planning if we're putting out an infrastructure plan
that lists the number of car parks,
but not the number of hospital beds?
Alright, I'd answer that in several ways.
So, um, again, have a, have a long history
of doing the modeling work for hospital beds.
And, um, invariably once we produce the modeling work
doesn't come to full fruition, the bed requirements.
And the reason for that is the earlier issue about the
dynamic nature of changes within the healthcare system, uh,
meaning some of the assumptions that went into
that bed modeling has changed. Are
You saying that you retrofit fit the number of beds
to the budget because that that is a political decision?
No. And so the information is really important
for politicians in government and opposition
because there's are long term yes assets for the public.
It's important we're able to think about that
before the budget has drawn a line across
how many beds are allowed.
Yes. No, I wasn't heading there.
What, what, what is meaning is that we can do the modeling
of the projections based on the current
demand, that's for sure.
And then what we can do is basically counterfactual lines
saying, what's coming down the pathway that might change
that bed number needed?
Sure. And so in those, what
what I'm getting at right now is in those counterfactual
lines right now, it's become much more difficult to project
partly because of what is occurring in a number
of places is this very significant movement to be able
to care for people in other environments.
So, uh, home care, uh, a number
of our hospitals now already are
delivering services in the home.
Uh, the idea that other places might be able to be sort
of intermediary, uh, areas.
So you might not need the full intensity of a full
hospital tertiary site.
And then to your earlier point,
you will always need hospitals and hospital beds.
So I think it's just the, the dynamic of where
that care gets there delivered is starting to change.
And our view about how much we can
deliver into people's homes.
So not arguing with the idea of, um,
care in people's homes.
And I understand the point that all forecasts
or projections have uncertainty around them,
but can't we have a proper public conversation about
that and have those estimates published?
Because how, how on earth would we, would we know how
to build assets with a, that are meant
to last a generation if we're not as politicians able
to be talking about what that 10, 20 year horizon
of investment is?
So surely, surely an infrastructure plan has
to have bed numbers in it.
Uh, I see. I think what we would, um,
in our health service planning piece, which
can have those projections in there, I think
that's the linkage to the health infrastructure plan.
So what's in the health infrastructure plan is much more the
nuts and bolts of the infrastructure.
I think what you, you, what I would've thought of is
what you've just described is our house service planning
that informs that infrastructure plan, which should yes.
Have be modeling in it.
And you can see that
and how that relates to the infrastructure plan.
Goodo, thank you. On page 20 10, 21 of your report, um,
you talk about a stronger focus on prevention
and in terms of the prevention activities, you noted, uh,
paragraph talking about, um,
preventing disease risk factors in which you noted
education, employment, income, housing
and climate as examples.
Um, what data points are you using to help you guide that
and are you doing any work, um,
with other government agencies to use information around,
for example, child material hardship to inform this?
Good. So we've got our, um, national director for the
health service, Dr. Nick Chamberlain.
Yes. Thanks. Uh, um, so
what you're talking about is really the impact
of the social determinants of health.
Yes. And that's really challenging.
You know, there are some that the health system can impact
such as housing, uh,
and we do have some investments in housing and,
and around healthy homes, others which are much broader
around interagency and sector work.
So, um, working with MSD sometimes around crim criminality,
working with, uh, um, police, et cetera,
that was a big focus in, uh,
the DHB days and we have recognized that.
And I'm actually looking at local leadership within each
of our public health, uh, teams at a local level so
that we can rebuild some of those interagency activities,
you know, social investment concepts
and working with other agencies
to improve those social determinants
Of health. Thank you. Just as
a supplementary of that,
can I just confirm that, um, as part of the data points
that you may be using or agencies you may be collaborating
with around this to get to some solutions will include, um,
data such as child material hardship,
and if you've already been using that, uh, what does
that tell you in terms of the state of our communities, uh,
relationship to, you know, the determinants
of health You noted in your plan on page 21?
Yes. Um, so absolutely that's an important, uh, area.
It's not something that I have
detailed information on right now.
I'm happy to get back to you on that,
but I, I don't have detail
Chair please, Mr.
Chair. Okay.
Just one last up then.
Um, in terms of advocacy,
cross agency advocacy, do you think there is a role for, um,
health New Zealand to, um, advocate on issues such
as child poverty reduction saying you've noted that,
you know, incomes being a determinant of health,
and if so, are you committed to doing advocacy
around those issues when it comes to your cross-agency work?
Uh, Mr. Chair's point of order, is this relevant to the,
It's on page 21.
I realize those words are on page 21.
Yeah, we are talking about Health New
Zealand's plan going forward. Um,
And speaking to the point
Of order, asked the chair whether you thought it was
spoken to the point of order.
Thank you. Um, the key language in the report, um,
which it's a briefing, uh, it says addressing.
So, you know, I, I acknowledge that healthy,
someone may not have the levers to change
how poverty targets, but they have committed
to addressing the determinants of health.
I can't see how they can address those determinants without
doing cross-agency work and advocacy.
So I think this is completely within the remit.
I, I'm, I'm happy to answer
Responsible. Um,
uh, so we don't, uh, perform a advocacy functions.
We work with agencies, so we work with other councils
and we work with other agencies collaboratively on projects
and programs and also provide technical advice
to other agencies and whether
that's a legislative requirement within public health.
Thank you very Much. Excellent. Thank you.
Um, and look, looking through, through the health plan, one
of the biggest areas of expenditure
of courses in hospital care, um, un understandably followed,
uh, by primary healthcare, how much
planning going forward do you think
can be done in the primary healthcare sector
to actually alleviate the pressure
and the cost pressure on hospitals?
Sure. So do we have our director of funding here to
National Director for Food funding and outcomes?
Um, I think the strengthened primary care
and public health sector is critical
to us making significant gains in some
of the health outcomes that we want to, uh, achieve
as Health New Zealand, you know,
including longer life expectancy
and, um, better quality of life for all New Zealanders,
strengthening primary care is the first port of call.
Uh, the availability
and access to primary care becomes very important.
And then, uh, what we have been trying
to do in recent times is both increase the workforce
in primary care, increase the sustainability
of primary care, uh,
and things like, uh, opening more access points,
including urgent care.
And we've also had a 24 7 digital, um,
access points available too for primary care as well.
So to me, they are absolutely fundamentals
of the health system, uh, as the first port of call
and at the significant port of call.
And if we strengthen that, then, uh, the ability for issues
to be dealt with early, uh,
and to, uh, so for example, uh, we know that a number
of cancer diagnoses
that are made in our emergency departments, a lot
of those should in theory, be able to either be found
by screening programs or picked up earlier.
So this goes to better health outcomes
by strengthening our public health
and primary care environment.
So very high priority for us trying to increase access,
trying to increase workforce,
and trying to give New Zealanders other choices by which
to access if you are in a place
that might not have high availability of primary caregivers.
Uh, I think, um, without wanting
to repeat previous answers, I think across
that five 10 year plan clinical services plan, integrating
with primary and community services, the IT advancements
that we'll make, they're all inputs to a future
that is about providing care close to the home.
Uh, Dale's point around access points to that service,
we need to get away from sort of one
or two access points about to have a system
that's working well and integrated together.
So there's a number of things across those interventions
that in the future and in one of the advantages
of Health New Zealand is to bring
that together rather than maybe the 20 district health
boards we had their previously.
So there is, um, some real advantages
that we can bring to bear around this
Stop here. And just noting
that I, cam has asked a question, Asha has,
and Jenny has her hand up as well,
And, and I appreciate,
appreciate the answer about increasing access
and think and things like that.
Does that include actually increasing the scope
of maybe some of our healthcare professionals, uh,
both in the, uh, both in, in, within,
within Health New Zealand and also in the funded sector,
whether that be, whether that be pharmacists
or, or, or the likes.
Yes. What planning's going into that area? So
Part of that is that, you know,
primary care is a multidisciplinary team, uh, that has a lot
of allied health staff who are very capable of, uh,
potentially having wider scopes of practice.
And so for example, even now we're seeing pharmacy, uh,
doing a lot more work.
We're seeing places like Plunket, uh, the ability to be able
to do immunizations, for example, the ability, ability
to treat mild illness, um, the abilities, you know,
called COVID medications
to be dispensed directly by pharmacy.
So absolutely, yes.
And we're trying to invest in those workforces
and scopes of practice.
Something Dr. Sullivan was just saying.
We're also looking at things like, um, in some
of our follow ups or FSAs, are there other workforces
that could do those rather than just having
specialists do them?
And I think the answer is that we're starting to get
through it, which is changing now is yes.
Uh, so we are just working, for example,
on musculoskeletal pathways, uh,
and advanced physiotherapists being able to do some of
that first specialists,
but also potentially some of the treatments as well.
And we are looking at things like audiologists, uh,
optometrists as well.
So there are multiple skilled health workforces
that we can potentially, uh,
move some things which were traditionally done in hospitals
and by specialists to them so
that our specialists can then get on
and focus much more on the much more advanced scope
of their practice as well.
So those movements are occurring
and in fact accelerating in the last year.
Um, that sounds pretty good. Uh, thank you Chair.
I've got a question about, uh, the,
the five long-term conditions of this, uh, plan
that you've talked about addressing cancer, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease,
mental health and addiction.
The only one that you've mentioned a partnership
with is the Cancer Control Agency.
You just tell me what, what is the nature of the partnership
with Cancer Control Agency
and why is there not one for those?
Is there not a agency for those other, um, diseases
or, uh, conditions?
Um, so trying
to answer the question about cancer control first.
So, um, obviously that was, uh, um, uh, was set up, uh,
some years ago to kind of oversee the system
and, um, as you know, Dale mentioned earlier, you know,
two biggest causes of harm in our communities is
cardiovascular disease and cancer.
And so as we are trying to, you know,
tackle those challenges, uh, it really obvious synergy
and working alongside the agency.
And so we established the Cancer Network, we've did
that in collaboration with, so it's a,
it's a joined up network.
We've actually done that within trauma with a CC as well.
So, uh, and that network with the trauma network,
it's a collaboration between a CC and Health New Zealand.
Um, the, uh, the kind, the space I guess
around cardiovascular, slightly more, um, you know,
challenging as you say, there is no,
I guess national cardiovascular, um, organization,
but a lot of that work occurs in primary care.
A lot of the cardiovascular
assessments occur in primary care.
And so really trying to tackle, um, those pathways, uh,
to ensure we can kind of obviously reduce that harm.
Well, so I get, I sort of, so I sort of get the, uh,
you know, obviously ACC is a standalone agency dealing
with its own, um, uh, mission.
What, why do you think like an ask around the nature
of the partnership with the cancer control agency?
Like, you know, their funding is within the budget
that you operate that Health New Zealand operates, um,
what sort of, like, what does this actually look like, align
with our targets, what does that actually look like?
So, um, I guess, you know, we, you know,
large organization, you know, um, a significant budget,
significant spend on cancer.
And so it helps us focus on
where the greatest series of needs are.
And this is a little bit the really point
about doing needs assessment.
So where are the biggest gaps in cancer services?
You know, where is the, the
communities that need the biggest care?
And so they've got the skill set to be able to kind
of inform, you know, tho those key questions.
And then our, our responsibility is to go, okay,
where do we put the focus of care?
And so in fact, we've done a lot of work in the last, um,
year since the announcement of the new cancer money, um,
around those models of care and,
and looking to how we deliver that again closer to home.
So we are, um, looking at packages, uh,
with the northern regions, um, you know, es establishing
and writing these out as we speak,
and the others are about to come to fruition,
which is taking that knowledge.
And then, and then our job is to implement that, uh,
in the community so that we can improve the care we've got,
since the new drugs came out,
we've had 10,000 more patients access these new drugs.
So we have to look at different ways
of delivering those services.
So the, the, it says
that this partnership will help reduce, um,
differences in cancer screening treatment
and survival rates, but what you've just talked about was
the extra resourcing around, um, treatments and scan
and resourcing for scanning.
Um, do you think that the cancer control agencies actually,
what, what are they, what are they providing beyond that?
You've talked about going out and reaching communities,
but without the resourcing which you are bringing, I've not
seen what, what they're bringing to this partnership.
Um, I mean, I can only speak on behalf
of Health New Zealand, um, rather than the agency.
Um, and so, uh,
and look, I work very closely, you know,
as a cancer specialist, um, with the agency, uh, as we kind
of tackle joint problems, um, around need, you know,
and to your point about screening, so you know, there's,
you know, we've always got a whole screening program we run
through, but then there's the collaboration.
You know, one of our priorities is, is lung screening.
You know, that's a piece of work that, uh, you know,
health New Zealand's sort of been leading,
but sort of being supported by.
So I guess from a Health New Zealand perspective, you know,
we have a, a good relationship with the agency.
Um, uh, you know, you know, we see, uh,
the support in delivering it.
But I guess to your point, we are the operational arm,
we are the component which does the doing
and, uh, the agency I guess, you know, great,
you know, mean they've done a lot of work.
But take us way back to COVID, you know, around
where the gaps were, where the needs were,
which helped our Health New Zealand focus on, you know,
diagnostics or whatever else it may be.
That was we, you know, need required.
Thank you. Um, Asha,
In the interest of time, I'll try to phrase this
as a yes or no question.
Question. Will the, with your improving ability to
predict your costs, will the health cost
pressure quantum that is included in prefu
or the next term of government, be informed by
bottom up process based on real estimates of your costs?
Um, our budgeting process for the current year,
25 26 was informed by bottom up processes.
So they're, they're not yet, as we said
before, at the level of maturity,
so we need to improve them.
But yes, we already have that in play.
And so for next financial year,
we'll be doing a similar exercise of the activities we need
to deliver the targets that we are,
and then obviously how that matches
with our financial envelope.
Sorry, my question was specifically about the estimate
of health cost pressures that goes into the prefu,
the pre-election fiscal update.
Um, we are well aware that that's our fiscal envelope.
Uh, we're already starting our planning for next
Year. How can you, because it hasn't
been written yet, I said
for the next term of parliament,
Oh, excuse me. I thought you meant
for 26, 27. My apologies.
Um, that's not a question that I'm able to answer.
Um, we do work on, uh, longer term, uh, planning.
Uh, again, I would describe that as something
that needs to mature.
Um, and we are, as we develop those systems that enable us,
as I said at the start, to marry bottom up with top down,
uh, we will look to improve on that.
I'm gonna go to Jenny, who's been waiting patiently.
Thank you very much. Um, my question actually,
I wanted a supplementary, so I want to jump back to that.
Um, acknowledging
that the multidisciplinary teams are all sort
of being developed around the country
and we're seeing some great, um, access
to general practice because of that.
Um, and those other alternate pathways
that it enables patients to get in the door to see, um,
someone when they first need to go
and see, uh, someone in primary care.
But my focus really is around, um, rurality
and in particular those hard
to reach areas all around New Zealand.
Uh, maybe up in the north in particular.
Um, where I'm from
and where you don't have connectivity
noting we've only got 87. Jenny,
I, I'll ask you to come to a question, please.
Nearly 87% connect every broadband.
Not everyone up in the north can afford Stalin.
What's the alternative?
Or is there a plan that you are working on that will, um,
even if it's working alongside telcos, what whatcha doing so
that we can reach into those hard to reach places?
Sure. We'll get Jason power to answer that question. Um,
Thank you for that question. It's
a really good one.
And, and it is an issue that we face across New Zealand,
given to state the office a wide varied, um,
around our communities.
Look, I think there's a number of areas we need
to focus on here, and there isn't an easy answer to some
of those around that broadband connectivity,
but about the rollout of our rule and
after hours plan for those services to extend it hours
or services to be open longer for our communities.
Now that does bring into transport.
We have our online digital twenty four seven service,
which is a phone based, but again, it can be phone based,
but does require cognitive
for the visual components of that service.
So I think the way we are working is about bringing
where we can services closer to the home of our communities
where we possibly can.
But your question is a good one around that cognitive
and it is a work that we need to continue
with our partners across the, across New Zealand.
Thank you. Thank you. Hey, thank you everybody.
Um, brownley, everyone else for participating today,
for making staff available to talk
on the New Zealand health plan.
Lily, appreciate your time. Cheers. Thank you for time.
Thank you. Adjourn.